docs: dynamic routes w/ gsP (#86402)
vercel/next.js: docs/01-app/03-api-reference/03-file-conventions/dynamic-routes.mdx

With `generateStaticParams`, you provide sample param values that can be used at build time. The build process validates that dynamic content and other runtime APIs are correctly handled, then generates static HTML files for the samples. Pages rendered with runtime params are saved to disk after a successful first request.

The sections below demonstrate both patterns.

#### Without `generateStaticParams`

All params are runtime data. Param access must be wrapped by Suspense fallback UI. Next.js generates a static shell at build time, and content loads on each request.

> **Good to know**: You can also use [`loading.tsx`](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/loading) for page-level fallback UI.

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export default async function Page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[slug]'>) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
        <Content slugPromise={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />

>       </Suspense>

Reviewer: Should we start showing this pattern?

```tsx
<Suspense>
  {params.then(({ slug }) => (
    <Content slug={slug} />
  ))}
</Suspense>
```

Author: Let's go - because this keeps the signature of Content "agnostic" to how it is being used, that is, it could still be used in other situations without having to be promise aware

Without `generateStaticParams`, param values are unknown during prerendering, making params runtime data. You must wrap param access in `<Suspense>` boundaries to provide fallback UI.

With `generateStaticParams`, you provide sample param values that can be used at build time. The build process validates that dynamic content and other runtime APIs are correctly handled, then generates static HTML files for the samples. Pages rendered with runtime params are saved to disk after a successful first request.

The sections below demonstrate both patterns.

#### Without `generateStaticParams`

All params are runtime data. Param access must be wrapped by Suspense fallback UI. Next.js generates a static shell at build time, and content loads on each request.

> **Good to know**: You can also use [`loading.tsx`](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/loading) for page-level fallback UI.

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export default async function Page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[slug]'>) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>

>         <Content slug={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />

Reviewer: I really wish we had better ergonomics for this pattern 😩 I kinda think the prop should be called `slugPromise`? They both suck but having a `slug` prop have to be awaited just feels worse...

Another option is to grab the slug directly in the JSX, since React can render promises:

```tsx
<Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
  {params.then(({ slug }) => (
    <Content slug={slug} />
  ))}
</Suspense>;

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: string }) {
  const res = await fetch(`.../${slug}`);

  //
}
```

Benefit of this one is now you can add `"use cache"` to Content, enabling it to be runtime prefetched. I think this is probably what we should show in the docs (assuming I'm not missing anything footgun-y about the pattern).

Author: I think we can ITG here, let's start with `slugPromise` first.

The sections below show different patterns, from simplest (all runtime) to most optimized (prerendered samples + caching).

#### Without `generateStaticParams`

The simplest approach. All params are runtime data.

**Properties:**

- **Build time**: No validation, no prerendering
- **Prerendered params**: None
- **Runtime params**: Reading params requires Suspense fallback UI (build fails without it), shell renders on-demand, UI updates when content resolves
- **Caching**: Memory only (cleared on server restart)

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export default async function Page({
  params,
}: {
  params: Promise<{ slug: string }>
}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
        <Content slug={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />
      </Suspense>
    </div>
  )
}

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: Promise<string> }) {
  const { slug: resolvedSlug } = await slug
  return <article>{/* Your content */}</article>
}
```

#### With `generateStaticParams` + `<Suspense>`

> Good for frequently updating content where you don't need disk persistence.

Author: As in, you might have several thousands of items, but only want a subset to be always readily available, and for the others, showing a loading spinner is ok

**Properties:**

- **Build time**: Validates route, prerenders samples (e.g., `/1`, `/2`, `/3`)
- **Prerendered params**: Instant - served from disk
- **Runtime params**: Shell renders immediately, UI updates when content resolves
- **Caching**: Memory only (cleared on server restart)

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export async function generateStaticParams() {
  return [{ slug: '1' }, { slug: '2' }, { slug: '3' }]
}

export default async function Page({
  params,
}: {
  params: Promise<{ slug: string }>
}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
        <Content slug={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />
      </Suspense>
    </div>
  )
}

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: Promise<string> }) {
  const { slug: resolvedSlug } = await slug
  return <article>{/* Your content */}</article>
}
```

#### With `generateStaticParams` + `<Suspense>` + `use cache` on page

> Recommended for most use cases. Provides immediate UI for prerendered and previously visited routes, with disk persistence similar to ISR.

Author: recommended if you are trying to do a 1:1 map to ISR

**Properties:**

- **Build time**: Validates route, prerenders samples
- **Prerendered params**: Instant - served from disk
- **Runtime params**: Shell renders immediately, UI updates when content resolves
- **Caching**: Disk (persists across server restarts)

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'
import { cacheLife } from 'next/cache'

export async function generateStaticParams() {
  return [{ slug: '1' }, { slug: '2' }, { slug: '3' }]
}

export default async function Page({
  params,
}: {
  params: Promise<{ slug: string }>
}) {
  'use cache'
  cacheLife('days')
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
        <Content slug={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />
      </Suspense>
    </div>
  )
}

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: Promise<string> }) {
  const { slug: resolvedSlug } = await slug
  return <article>{/* Your content */}</article>
}
```

#### With `generateStaticParams` + `use cache` on page (no Suspense)

> Full page waits but cached to disk. Good for less-frequently-changing content.

Author: Inverted case, you might have several thousands of items, but only want a subset to be always readily available, assuming there's tolerance for blocking navigations every now and then - I am almost just adding this for completeness sake tbh

> **Properties:**

Author: Verify the rendering preview of this entry - likely just noise, but in my editor it helped visually

- Since the `params` prop is a promise. You must use `async`/`await` or React's use function to access the values.
  - In version 14 and earlier, `params` was a synchronous prop. To help with backwards compatibility, you can still access it synchronously in Next.js 15, but this behavior will be deprecated in the future.

### With Cache Components

> When using [Cache Components](/docs/app/getting-started/cache-components) with dynamic routes, params are runtime data that require special handling. During prerendering, param values are unknown (like `/blog/hello-world` or `/blog/123`), so fallback UI using `<Suspense>` boundaries is required when accessing them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using [Cache Components](/docs/app/getting-started/cache-components) with dynamic route segments, `params` become runtime data that require special handling. During prerendering, param values are unknown (like `/blog/hello-world` or `/blog/123`), so fallback UI using `<Suspense>` boundaries is required when accessing them.
```

You should use [`generateStaticParams`](/docs/app/api-reference/functions/generate-static-params) to prerender your most popular routes at build time (e.g., `/blog/1`, `/blog/2`, `/blog/3`). This serves two purposes:

- It validates that your route doesn't access dynamic APIs like `cookies()` or `headers()` during prerendering
- It generates static HTML files for both the specific routes you list and a static shell for runtime params

> Prerendered routes load instantly, while runtime params use the static shell to show static content (like headers and navigation) immediately while param-dependent content updates when ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prerendered routes load instantly, while runtime params use the static shell to show static content (like headers and navigation) immediately while param-dependent content streams in when ready.
```

> The sections below show different patterns, from simplest (all runtime) to most optimized (prerendered samples, and caching). We recommend wrapping param access in Suspense boundaries to provide meaningful loading states.

Reviewer 2: Maybe change prerendered samples to use more of the native terms, like prerendered routes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sections below show different patterns, from simplest (all runtime) to most optimized (prerendered samples, and caching). 
```

> > **Good to know**: You can check the `X-Nextjs-Cache` response header to verify your caching strategy. It will show `HIT` or `MISS` for disk-cached routes, and won't appear for memory-only caching. Your hosting provider might replace this header with their own version.

Reviewer 2: I think this might sound confusing for people who don't know the difference between disk-cache and memory-only caching. Can we simplify it? Maybe just it'll show "HIT" or "MISS" for the cached route.

#### Without `generateStaticParams`

The simplest approach. All params are runtime data. Param access must be wrapped by Suspense fallback UI. Next.js generates a static shell at build time, and content loads on each request.

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx"
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export default async function Page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[slug]'>) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
        <Content slug={params.then((p) => p.slug)} />

>       </Suspense>

Reviewer 2: We should also recommend `loading.ts` at the page-level

    </div>
  )
}

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: Promise<string> }) {
  const resolvedSlug = await slug
  const res = await fetch(`https://api.vercel.app/blog/${resolvedSlug}`)
  const post = await res.json()
  return (
    <article>
      <h2>{post.title}</h2>
      <p>{post.content}</p>
    </article>
  )
}
```

#### With `generateStaticParams`

> Prerender your most popular or high-value pages by providing params ahead of time. These pages are generated at build time for instant loading.

Reviewer 2: I think one thing we might be missing from this section is that it's ok to prerender all routes ahead of time (depending on how many there are).

During the build process, the route is executed with the values returned from `generateStaticParams` to validate that any dynamic content or runtime data access is properly handled with Suspense or `use cache`.

> For runtime params, the build process attempts to prerender a static shell treating params as runtime data. To enable disk caching (ISR-style) for runtime params and include param-specific content in the initial HTML, access params outside any Suspense boundaries, including parent boundaries like [`loading.tsx`](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/loading):

Reviewer 2: I think you could just say, to enable prerendering, and more disk caching and ISR style (some people might not know what those terms are).

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx" highlight={5-7,10,22,24}
import { Suspense } from 'react'

export async function generateStaticParams() {
  return [{ slug: '1' }, { slug: '2' }, { slug: '3' }]
}

export default async function Page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[slug]'>) {
  const { slug } = await params

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Blog Post</h1>
      <Content slug={slug} />
    </div>
  )
}

async function Content({ slug }: { slug: string }) {
  const post = await getPost(slug)
  return (
    <article>
      <h2>{post.title}</h2>
      <p>{post.content}</p>
    </article>
  )
}

async function getPost(slug: string) {
  'use cache'
  const res = await fetch(`https://api.vercel.app/blog/${slug}`)
  return res.json()
}
```

> Build-time validation only covers code paths that execute with the sample params. If your route has conditional logic that accesses runtime APIs (like `cookies()`) for certain param values not in your samples, those branches won't be validated at build time.

Reviewer 2: Could you show an example of this to help people understand what these branches look like in code?

```

When using `fetch` inside the `generateStaticParams` function, the requests are [automatically deduplicated](/docs/app/guides/caching#request-memoization). This avoids multiple network calls for the same data Layouts, Pages, and other `generateStaticParams` functions, speeding up build time.

> ### Dynamic GET Route Handlers with `generateStaticParams`

Reviewer 2: Great example

```

When using `fetch` inside the `generateStaticParams` function, the requests are [automatically deduplicated](/docs/app/guides/caching#request-memoization). This avoids multiple network calls for the same data Layouts, Pages, and other `generateStaticParams` functions, speeding up build time.

### Dynamic GET Route Handlers with `generateStaticParams`

`generateStaticParams` also works with dynamic [Route Handlers](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route) to statically generate API responses at build time:

```ts filename="app/api/posts/[id]/route.ts" switcher
export async function generateStaticParams() {
  return [{ id: '1' }, { id: '2' }, { id: '3' }]
}

export async function GET(
  request: Request,
  { params }: RouteContext<'/api/posts/[id]'>
) {
  const { id } = await params
  // Fetch and return post data

>   return Response.json({ id, title: `Post ${id}` })

Reviewer: Might want to show fetching data here, which I think needs a separate function with "use cache" on it. Otherwise the motivation for using gSP isn't super clear.
